\section{Executive Summary}

The rapid advancement of automation and embedded systems has paved the way for intelligent robotic platforms that can perform tasks with minimal human intervention. This project centers on the design and implementation of an autonomous robotic vehicle that follows a defined path and avoids obstacles using a combination of infrared (IR), ultrasonic, and color sensors. The goal is to develop a functional prototype that simulates intelligent pathfinding and decision-making mechanisms applicable to real-world environments such as automated delivery systems or industrial navigation.

The robot utilizes IR sensors to detect black lines on a contrasting surface, enabling it to follow a designated route. Ultrasonic sensors act as proximity detectors, allowing the robot to identify and respond to obstacles in its path. A color sensor is also integrated to enhance the decision-making process by identifying the color characteristics of encountered objects. Based on predefined criteria, objects are classified such as "Color A" and "Color B," which influence the robot's navigational behavior.

A notable strength of the system lies in its modularity and cost-effectiveness. The robot is built on a simple two-wheel chassis and powered by an Arduino Uno R4 microcontroller. It includes essential peripherals such as an L298N motor driver, a 7.4V LiPo battery, and a power switch for control and power management. This hardware architecture supports future expansion, making it ideal for educational and research-focused applications.

The software is developed using the Arduino IDE in embedded C++, prioritizing real-time performance. The line-following algorithm processes digital feedback from the IR sensors, while obstacle avoidance logic is activated when distance thresholds are exceeded by the ultrasonic sensors. Upon detecting an obstacle, the robot either pauses or takes a detour based on the color of the object. For example, if the color sensor recognizes a specific hue matching predefined RGB ratio ranges (Color A or B), the robot alters its path accordingly—rerouting, stopping, or re-centering on the line after bypassing the object.

The development followed an iterative process, including detailed hardware calibration and software testing under various lighting and surface conditions. IR sensors were optimized for contrast sensitivity, ultrasonic readings were smoothed to reduce noise, and color detection was validated using controlled samples to ensure consistent performance.

As of this report, the robot successfully demonstrates autonomous line-following, obstacle detection within a 25 cm range, and color-based behavioral responses. This project serves as a practical demonstration of sensor integration and real-time decision-making in embedded systems, providing a solid foundation for more complex robotics applications in the future.
